<br>

### Exercises 3

#### Abby Johnson

#### 4/6/22

<br>

### 1) What Causes What?

<br>

(**Based on [this podcast from Planet
Money.](https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2013/04/23/178635250/episode-453-what-causes-what)**)

<br>

**1. Why can’t I just get data from a few different cities and run the
regression of “Crime” on “Police” to understand how more cops in the
streets affect crime?\* (“Crime” refers to some measure of crime rate
and “Police” measures the number of cops in a city.)**

We can’t run a simple regression of “Crime” on “Police” to understand
how more cops in the street affect crime, because crime is highly
correlated with the number of police. For example, in areas with
consistently high crime rates, there will be an influx of police
present. However, we may still see crime increase in this area. The
crime rate often predicts the number of cops, so we cannot separate the
effect that police has on crime.

**2. How were the researchers from UPenn able to isolate this effect?
Briefly describe their approach and discuss their result in the “Table
2” below, from the researchers’ paper.**

The researchers at UPenn were able to isolate this effect using an
indicator of terrorist threat in a city. When a city is under a “high
alert” of terrorist threat, the number of cops in the streets increases.
This increase in police force is completely uncorrelated with street
crime, therefore it makes a good instrument for police force in the
model. With the high alert variable, we can see the relationship between
crime and the number of cops on the street, regardless of the street
crime already present.

As shown in “Table 2”, the high alert variable has a significant
negative relationship with crime, both by itself and when controlling
for Metro ridership. Therefore, we can see that an increase of cops on
the street does in fact correlate to lower levels of crime.

**3. Why did they have to control for Metro ridership? What was that
trying to capture?**

The researchers had to control for Metro ridership, because they wanted
to make sure that the number of potential victims of street crime
remained constant despite a terrorist alert. The researchers considered
that a high alert of terrorist threat may reduce the number of people on
the street, and therefore reduce the amount of crime. Comparing Metro
ridership across all levels of terrorist alerts helps the researchers
understand if civilian presence is the true cause of a decrease in
crime, and controls for potential omitted variable bias in the model.

**From “Table 4” below, describe the model being estimated in the first
column? What is the conclusion?**

The model in the first column of “Table 4”, estimates if an increase in
cops affects crime differently in District 1 compared to all of the
other districts when controlling for Metro ridership. From the table
results, we can see that there does seem to be a significantly different
effect in District 1 compared to the other districts. District 1 has a
significant negative estimate, while the other districts have a
statistically insignificant negative relationship. Therefore, we can
confidently say that police presence is correlated with a decrease in
crime rate in District 1, while we can not be confident of the
relationship in other districts.

<br>

### 2) Tree Modeling: Dengue Cases

In order to predict dengue cases in Puerto Rico and Peru, I compare a
CART, random forest, and gradient-boosted tree model, all of which using
city, season, specific humidity, average temperature, and amount of
precipitation as controls. Then, each model’s out-of-sample performance,
or RMSE, is compared to decide which model is best.

While I could use a log transformation for the total number of dengue
cases, tree models are fairly robust to skewed distributions of features
in the dataset, so there may only be marginal improvements of accuracy
with a log transformation. Moreover, maintaining total cases in the
model, instead of log cases, helps the model predictions and results be
more intuitive in their interpretation.

##### RMSE Comparison (CART, Random Forest, Gradient-boosted)

    ## [1] 29.62332

    ## [1] 27.58068

    ## [1] 28.5783

From the RMSE estimates, we can see that the random forest model was
best at predicted dengue cases, because it has the lowest out-of-sample
performance. Now, let’s look at partial dependence plots from our random
forest model, to understand the relationship between dengue cases and
other predictive variables.

##### Partial Dependence Plots

![](exercises-3_files/figure-markdown_strict/pdp1-1.png)![](exercises-3_files/figure-markdown_strict/pdp1-2.png)![](exercises-3_files/figure-markdown_strict/pdp1-3.png)

From these partial dependence plots, we can see that as humidity
increases and passes a certain threshold, dengue cases rapidly increase.
Likewise, as precipitation and temperature increase, the number of
dengue cases rapidly increases.

<br>

### 3) Predictive Model Building: Green Certification

#### Overview

As energy efficient and “green” construction increases in popularity, it
is important to understand how this type of construction affects
revenues for property owners. In an effort to analyze this relationship,
I build a model to predict how green status affects revenue per square
foot per calendar year, controlling for other building characteristics.

#### Data & Model

I use data containing information on 7,894 commercial rental properties
from across the United States, 685 of which have been awarded either
LEED or EnergyStar certification as a green building. The dataset also
includes various building information such as size of building, leasing
rate, and amenities.

In order to predict revenue per square foot per calendar year, a new
variable needs to be created. Therefore, I created a new variable
“rent”, which is the product of the rent charged to tenants in the
building and the leasing rate.

I ran CART, random forest, and gradient-boosted tree models. I choose
tree models for this dataset, because they are robust to interactions
between features, and this dataset likely includes various interactions
between building characteristics. For example, energy costs likely
interact with size of building. So, tree models limit the need to
explicitly include these interactions in the model.

Each model is a regression tree model of rent onto all variables in the
dataset other than “Rent (per tenant)”, “leasing\_rate”, “LEED”,
“Energystar”. Because these excluded variables provide similar
information to other variables in the dataset,like green rating and
rent, I chose to drop them from the model in order to limit
over-fitting.

#### Results

##### RMSE Comparison (CART, Random Forest, Gradient-boosted)

    ## [1] 10.17621

    ## [1] 8.258768

    ## [1] 9.63983

##### Rand Forest Partial Dependence Plot

![](exercises-3_files/figure-markdown_strict/pdp2-1.png)

#### Conclusion

Based on the results of the models, the random forest model performed
the best with the lowest RMSE. Looking at the partial dependence plot of
rent revenue on green rating, we can see that the average change in
rental income per square foot increases by about 0.6 for building with a
green rating. These results provide evidence that green rated buildings
have a higher total revenue from rent, which makes sense when we consider higher rent may be required to cover the extra costs potentially incurred in the construction of "green" initiatives. 

<br>

### 4) Predictive Model Building: California Housing

#### Overview

Location is an important factor when considering house value. For
example, geographic proximity to certain amenities or natural features
can dramatically increase the value of a home. Such is the case for
homes in California. In an effort to analyze this relationship for
California homes, I built a model to predict how location and other
housing characteristics affect median house value.

#### Data & Model

I use data containing information at the census-tract level on
residential housing in the state of California. The dataset include
information on house longitude, latitude, median age, total rooms, total
bedrooms, population, households, and median income.

I ran CART, random forest, and gradient-boosted tree models. I choose
tree models for this dataset, because they are robust to interactions
between features, and this dataset is likely to include various
interactions between housing characteristics. For example, total rooms
likely interacts with total bedrooms. So, tree models limit the need to
explicitly include interactions in the model.

Each model is a regression tree model of median house value onto
everything in the dataset except “households”, and “population”. These
excluded variables are objective information about the census tract, and
likely don’t have much relationship with house value. Therefore, I
excluded these variables to limit unnecessary noise or variation in the
models.

We can plot the observed median house values on a map according to their
respective longitude and latitude, to visualize how geographic location
may affect house value. Then, we can plot the predictions from the best
model on a map to visualize the predictions in comparison to the true
values. Likewise, we can plot the residuals of our predictions to
visualize how accurate the predictions are.

#### Results

##### RMSE Comparison (CART, Random Forest, Gradient-boosted)

    ## [1] 61061.1

    ## [1] 52835.73

    ## [1] 56015.97

##### Median House Values, Predictions, and Residuals by Geographic Location

<br>

![](exercises-3_files/figure-markdown_strict/p4_plot1-1.png)

<br>

![](exercises-3_files/figure-markdown_strict/p4_plot2-1.png)

<br>

![](exercises-3_files/figure-markdown_strict/p4_plot3-1.png)

<br>

#### Conclusion

From the model results, we can see that the random forest tree model
performed the best with the lowest RMSE. From this model, we can
visualize the predicted median house values (Figure2) in comparison to
the true median house values (Figure 1). In general, we can see that as we move from West to East, house values tend to descrease. In other words, houses on the coast of California have higher house values, on average, than houses further inland. This makes sense when we consider the large coastal cities in California, and the premium paid to live near the ocean. From these figures, we can see
that the distribution of the predicted values are very close to the true
values. The predicted values only seem to undervalue houses along the
coast of California in the Bay Area and near Los Angeles. Moreover,
Figure 3 shows the distribution of the predicted residuals, which
clearly show low residual estimates on average. These figures provide
further evidence of the accuracy of this model in predicting median
house value.

<br>
